[Music]
uh
good morning nina's just doing one of
those rugby burpees there for us are you
watching breakfast this morning with uh
louise minchin and dan walker eight
o'clock our headlines for you
on his last full day as president donald
trump orders travel restrictions on the
uk
and the eu to be lifted but joe biden
says it's too late and the bans will
stay
storm christoph brings danger to life
flood warnings with snow
also expected rain is the primary
concern though we could see over a
month's worth fall in some
places i'll guide you through the full
forecast
here on bbc breakfast we will speak to
the liverpool captain
jordan henderson about being named the
champion of
nhs charities together for his efforts
during the pandemic give us the money
that we're owed the thousands of pub
restaurant and cafe owners still waiting
for grants they were promised to keep
them afloat
breakfast has seen a letter suggesting
fewer than half of local councils
have started paying out
[Music]
and grandfather clock aka former england
manager glenn hoddle
will join us to talk about his time on
the masked
singer
hello good morning tuesday the 19th of
january our top story it's president
trump's final full day in office today
but he's still clashing with his
incoming successor joe biden over
matters of policy
overnight mr trump announced that a ban
on travelers entering the u.s
from the uk europe and brazil would be
lifted next week but president-elect joe
biden's team immediately
said that restrictions will remain our
washington correspondent nomi iqbal has
america's capital city is eerily quiet
and so is its president mr trump has
been largely silent
after twitter permanently banned him but
there is some last minute business
he announced a covert 19 travel ban on
much of europe
would be lifted the incoming biden
administration plans to reverse it
though
in a tweet the incoming press secretary
says in fact
they will strengthen it one thing they
won't be able to stop
are mr trump's pardons like all outgoing
presidents he plans to use his last bit
of power
to grant clemency to more than 100
convicted criminals
this is all against the backdrop of a
city that's turned into a fortress
up to 25 000 troops from the national
guard are here
the most since the civil war era this
nation is still reeling from the riots
earlier this month it's emerged that
some of them had connections to law
enforcement
and now all the inauguration security is
being vetted by the army
and the fbi one of the bigger challenges
will be identifying people in law
enforcement
uh who have sympathies for these groups
or act in concert with them
and again law enforcement has all the
authorities they need the fbi has
jurisdiction
to investigate civil rights abuses by
law enforcement officers
they just need to prioritize that work
president-elect biden will fly into the
city for his inauguration at capitol
hill
a trip he originally planned to make by
train president trump won't be there
the first time that's happened in more
than 150 years
he plans to leave for florida wednesday
morning with the first lady melania
trump she has delivered a goodbye
address
in all circumstances i ask every
american
to be an ambassador of be best
to focus on what unites us to raise
above what divides us
to always choose love over hatred peace
over violence and others before yourself
four years on and president trump will
be leaving the white house
just as he entered it with chaos and
without convention
he did get his wall though just not the
one he expected
nami rick bell bbc news washington let's
get more
from nomia who joins us from washington
right now um we knew it was going to be
sort of unusual transition of power but
tell us what happens over the next
few hours or so
yes that's right the city and the
country is gearing up
for the incoming president joe biden
actually arrives here in
washington dc later this morning he will
be flying in rather than
taking the train which he normally does
from the nearby state of delaware and
that's due to security concerns
he'll be meeting the vice
president-elect kamala harris they plan
to attend a
a memorial for the americans who've died
with covert 19.
joe biden's also expected to be putting
the finishing touches to his inaugural
speech which will be aimed at unifying
the country
because america is politically a really
diff difficult country right now the
fact that you have up to 25 000
armed troops on the ground here in dc to
safeguard
the incoming president says a lot but
this city is leaving nothing to chance
after that deadly
assault on congress earlier in the month
there's something else that's uh
happening as well which is
a deep clean of the white house this is
obviously joe biden's
new home it's a big building six floors
and more than 130
rooms but it's also a building which has
seen outbreaks of coronavirus cases
including president trump himself who
came down with covid19
in october so there'll be a lot of
cleaning
going on there mr trump has been keeping
a low profile
uh but we do expect to to hear from him
at some point today and tomorrow
obviously we mentioned that the curving
19 travel bans
the pardons as well we have heard that
he's expecting or hoping to have some
sort of
uh send-off at the base where he'll be
flying away from but any hopes that he
might reach out to the bidens as they
they enter this new era
very short-lived because um he and his
wife the first lady melania trump do not
plan to even greet
uh joe biden and dr jill biden that task
is left to the chief usher of the white
house
very interesting uh thank you very much
thank you the met office has issued a
danger to life weather warning for parts
of england today this is as storm
kristoff heads for the uk
northern eastern and central england are
the areas most
at risk of severe flooding and residents
are being urged to prepare flood
defenses stay away from swollen rivers
as well
those amber warnings are in place until
thursday and we'll be live in one of
those areas where we've
been a lot in the last few years hebdon
bridge um where laxmi gopal is going to
be she's going to be there about 8
30 for us this morning telling us
exactly how preparations are going there
matt will also have a forecast for you
shortly too the pandemics created a
backlog of court cases which could
damage the criminal justice system for
years
that's a warning from the four criminal
justice watchdogs for england and wales
the inspectorates for policing prisons
probation and prosecution
say they have grave concerns after
figures revealed there are now 54
000 crown court cases waiting to be
heard mps will question the chief
inspector
of probation services later today
six conservative mps have backed
labour's call for the government to keep
the universal credit top up
which is worth 20 pounds a week in place
after the end of march
they'd been ordered to abstain but broke
ranks and the motion passed by
278 votes to none our chief political
correspondent adam fleming is in
westminster this morning
and can sort of pick up the pieces adam
we spoke about this yesterday we saw it
happen yesterday
so what happens from this point on well
what happens now
is a big discussion inside the
government between the prime minister
the chancellor rishi sunak and the work
and pension secretary to raise coffee
who are looking at what you could
replace this 20 pounds a week
boost to universal credit with and we're
told there are up to 14 different
options on the table that they're
looking at the pros and cons of
and they involve things like do you give
a one-off payment and then it's a case
of how much
and when and is it just a one-off or do
you extend this 20 pound a week
increase for a temporary period or do
you
withdraw it gradually so it tapers down
but then you've got to discuss how long
that is and
how much you reduce it by and then
you've got this issue of well what about
people that aren't on universal credit
now but might need to go on it
after april would they benefit from from
this at all um so that's going to be
discussed over the next few weeks the
aim is to have something announced by
the time of the budget which is on the
3rd of march
although it may come before that and
ministers also
say that it really depends on what the
situation is with the pandemic
because that has a knock-on impact on
the state of the
economy and the support that's needed
and certainly that was the message here
on breakfast this morning from brandon
lewis the northern ireland secretary
the uplift was in terms of being able to
deal with the
the challenges around the virus we don't
yet know for sure
where we will be at that point in terms
of advice we've all seen how quickly
things can change with the way this
virus moves over the last
few months and indeed the last few weeks
but the chance in the world compensation
will be looking at this
they'll make decisions about this ahead
of the period at which this
is currently due to end and they'll make
some decisions based on the information
we've got at that point in time in terms
of where we are as a country
um with the virus and the ability if we
have an ability at that point to reopen
the economy a bit more
so it's no longer a question of if this
20 pounds a week universal credit boost
continues it's a question of
what is it replaced with now labour
would say that shift has only happened
because of pressure applied by them and
things like the debate in parliament
yesterday
the government would probably say well
they've always said they want to help
people they just want to make sure it's
the right kind of help for what's
happening to the economy at the time
adam thank you very much for that we'll
speak a bit later on
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news